---
title: Adventures in Neovim
slug: adventures-in-neovim
description: My first real foray into the wacky and wonderful world of Neovim
author: "Luke Covalt"
date: 2025-10-13
updated: 2025-10-13
draft: false
tags: [blog, vim, neovim]
---

I've long had fasination of vim. The idea of using short, expressive operators
and motions to quickly navigate through text and code was always very
compelling. Yet, despite being a Linux user and programming on and off for 25
years or so, I never made a real attempt to learn vi or vim. My usage was
essentially limited to accidentally finding myself in vim, getting angry that
typing wasn't working properly, and struggling for entirely too long to close
vim. Later, I would "try" vim a few more times - spending maybe 10-15 minutes
before giving up and deciding that it simply wasn't for me.

In hindsight, the problem was obvious - there was nothing wrong with vim - I was
simply trying to learn too much at once. I was just getting my feet wet with web
development and basic programming principles. Trying to also learn an arcane
editor at the same time was just too much. This is a tendency I would notice in
my personal projects, where I would try to incorporate too many new things. It
was likely comes as a shock to no one, I've found it much more efficient to
focus on learning one or two things at a time, while keeping the rest of my
chosen tech stack to something a bit more familiar.

That brings me to today - after programming on and off for 25 years and
programming full-time for nearly the last 10 years, I finally felt ready to give
vim a real shot. I've seen how fast the vim wizards were able to manipulate
their code - wanted to at least give it a week or two of intentional use before
I decided if I wanted to write it off forever or not. I've been using Neovim for
about a week now, and despite there being a few bumps along the way, I was
shocked at how easy it was to pick up the basics and be reasonably productive.

## Getting starting with Neovim

I decided to use Neovim primarily due to the ease of extensibility through Lua
plugins. At least initially, my plan was to keep my config pretty barebones and
just learn the basics, only adding plugins as I needed them. I first started by
working through `:Tutor` in Neovim - and something magical happened. Rather than
feeling completely lost and frustrated, it only took about 15 minutes of working
through the tutorial to see the value. I was just doing the bare basics the
tutorial taught, but I was hooked! I wasn't anywhere near productive yet, but
the most important thing happened pretty quickly - **I was having fun!** I find
this is the biggest hurdle for learning anything new - if you can't find a way
to make it fun, you're not going to stick with it long term.

After about 2 hours of practice, I was navigating clunkily, but decently well
using some of the basic operators and motions. I knew how to jump between
blocks, paragraphs, find words, substitute text, etc. At that point, I was still
more productive in VS Code, but not by much. This was only my first or second
day using Neovim, but I was pretty confident that this was the time it would
stick, and it would become my full-time editor. I could always use insert/visual
mode and the arrow keys in a pinch when I needed to do something I hadn't yet
learned to do the vim way.

## LazyVim, Kickstart, vs. config from scratch

Now that I was reasonably confident I would be using Neovim long-term, I wanted
to get some basic configuration and plugins to make it suitable for my full-time
IDE. Up until this point, I was just using stock Neovim. This was perfect for
learning, but there were many major features I knew I needed, and the thought of
configuring everything myself was pretty overwhelming. I read mixed opinions on
whether beginner should start with something like Lazy or Kickstart, or if they
should start from scratch. This section is going to describe my experience
trying each approach and why ultimately **I recommend kickstart for most
people**.

### LazyVim

I did some quick Googling and found that LazyVim was overwhelmingly the most
popular option. Because I am brand new, I also made the mistake of initially
thinking LazyVim and lazy.nvim were the same thing - they're not! lazy.nvim is
an awesome plugin manager that can be used even if you aren't using the complete
LazyVim distro. This is an important distinction, as it made my decision to move
away from LazyVim much easier, as I could still use the lazy.nvim plugin
manager.

Getting LazyVim up and running following the official
[installation guide](https://www.lazyvim.org/installation) was simple. Neovim
roared to life and looked great. It looked to have most of the featured I
needed. Then I had a realization: I still had no idea what I was doing. I spent
some time with the docs and figured out the basics, but I couldn't shake the
feeling that I wasn't really learning how to use Neovim, I was just learning
LazyVim. I wasn't any closer to understanding how I could customize my setup to
make it suit my needs specifically. At least for now, I felt LazyVim wasn't for
me and I would prefer to build from scratch. Even if I ended up with a
full-featured distro in the future, understanding how to build it from scratch
would be hugely beneficial for my own customizations in the future.

### Configuring Neovim from scratch

The next step in my journey was to start my own configuration from scratch. This
way I knew exactly what I was getting and how to update and maintain my config
in the future. I don't remember how far I made it down this path - but this is
when I realized lazy.nvim could be used to manage plugins without using LazyVim.
I got lazy.nvim, Telescope, and one or two other basic plugins setup. I had yet
another somewhat disappointing epiphany - I was not going to be productive for
likely dozens of hours. I knew I wanted a directory browser, git status, theme
support, LSPs, formatting, and syntax highlighting for the many languages I
would eventually use. Each of these things would require a substantial amount of
time to research, learn, and setup. While I definitely want to configure things
myself, trying to do so without some basic examples as a reference was going to
take a prohibitively large amount of time for me. This lead me to reconsider my
decision to do everything from scratch, and brought me to Kickstart.

### Kickstart.nvim

The final stop (so far) on my journey was
[Kickstart.nvim](https://github.com/nvim-lua/kickstart.nvim). Kickstart is a
simple, single-file Lua script designed to teach you how to configure Neovim as
you go. I watched TJ DeVries' awesome
[NeoVim Setup Guide](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m8C0Cq9Uv9o) on YouTube and
knew it was exactly what I wanted. It got me a minimal setup with some of the
core features I needed, like Telescope and LSPs, but made it dead simple to
strip out what I didn't want. Even for the things I didn't need, it was great to
have examples that I could use for inspiration when making my own config.

Something I initially thought I didn't like about Kickstart is that it is
contained in a single file. In hindsight, I think Kickstart achieved exactly
what it set out to do - I knew I wanted to split my keymaps and plugins into
their own files to make it easier to locate and maintain long-term. I was also
new to Lua, this forced me to learn how to import Lua files and import lazy.nvim
plugins. Because of the way Kickstart is structured, you can read the file top
to bottom, make tweaks along the way, and take what you learn to make it your
own. I highly recommend Kickstart to anyone looking for a minimal config to get
them started on building their own in no-time.

## My current setup

My current config can be viewed on github at
[ltcovalt/nvim-config](https://github.com/ltcovalt/nvim-config). It still shares
a lot of DNA with Kickstart, but I have fully modularized it, tweaked several of
the settings to my liking, and added some plugins that fit my workflow. For the
most part, Kickstart included examples and instructions for what I deem the most
critical plugins, like Telescope and LSPs.

## My progress so far

I think it's been just about 2 weeks since I switched to Neovim full time.
Overall, I am quite pleased with the progress made so far. I definitely have my
moments of frustration and have been tempted to fallback to my VS Code setup.
But for each of those moments, I have just as many moments of discovery,
learning a simple new way to navigate my text even quicker. I'd say I'm not yet
as productive as I was with my old setup, but I am starting to get close and I
can tell I still have enormous room to improve.

## Conclusion

This whole process has been a good reminder that timing really does matter when
trying to learn and apply new things. When I first learned basic JavaScript
programming, I was probably about 12 years old and did not particularly enjoy
it. It led me to pursue a career in network engineering and security, because
infrastructure just made more sense to me. Now, I use JavaScript almost
exclusively for work. The issue wasn't that I hated programming or was bad it,
it was just that at that point in life, I was trying to juggle too much. I was
trying to learn computer repair, Linux, web design, Cisco networking, graphic
design, and programming simultaneously - while attending school and working part
time. I think the same thing happened with vim, and now that I am comfortable
with web development, I have a bit of mental capacity to spare to devote to
learning vim.

To wrap things up succinctly - if you are considering giving vim a shot, I
highly recommend simply working through `:Tutor` on a stock Neovim install.
After getting a handle on basic navigation and file operations, Kickstart is an
amazing tool to help learn how to configure your own environment.
