---
title: "ServiceNow Tree Traversal: Post-Order Depth-First Search"
slug: servicenow-tree-traversal-post-order-depth-first
description:
  Use Depth-first search to traverse a tree and process nodes in post-order
author: "Luke Covalt"
date: 2025-09-27
updated: 2025-09-27
draft: false
tags:
  [blog, servicenow, tree, algorithm, recursion, post-order, depth-first, dfs]
---

<Alert type="info">
	This post is part of a multi-part series on Tree Traversal  
	
	Previous: [Pre-Order Depth-First Search](/posts/servicenow-tree-traversal-pre-order-depth-first-search)

    View the complete code on GitHub: [Tree.js](https://github.com/ltcovalt/covalt-dev/blob/main/src/content/scripts/servicenow/Tree.js)

</Alert>

In the previous post, we created a `traversePreOrder` to process a tree data
structure from the top down using a pre-order DFS algorithm. In this post, we'll
see how we can process a tree from the bottom up using a post-order DFS
algorithm.

Fortunately, all the logic we built for our previous function will carry over to
our new `postOrderTraversal`. If you haven't read the previous post, you should
do that now. Otherwise, copy the existing function and simply move the callback
function to be executed after the while loop.

#### Tree.postOrderTraversal

```js
/**
 * traverses an n-ary tree using a post-order depth first search
 * @param {object} params - named function parameters
 * @param {GlideRecord} params.node - the current node being processed
 * @param {string} [params.parentField=parent] - name of the parent reference field
 * @param {function} [params.callback] - function to call for each node visited
 * @param {array} [params.stackPath=[]] - array of node sys_ids representing the current path of nodes already visited
 */
Tree.traversePostOrder = ({
  node,
  parentField = "parent",
  stackPath = [],
  callback,
}) => {
  if (!node) throw Error("missing required parameter: node");
  if (!node.isValidRecord())
    throw Error("node parameter must be a valid GlideRecord");

  // ensure the current node is not already in the path
  let nodeId = node.getUniqueValue();
  let tableName = node.getTableName();
  if (stackPath.includes(nodeId))
    throw Error(
      "recursive reference found in path: " +
        stackPath.concat(nodeId).join("-->"),
    );
  stackPath.push(nodeId);

  // execute this function recursively for each child node
  let children = new GlideRecord(tableName);
  children.addQuery(parentField, nodeId);
  children.query();
  while (children.next()) {
    let child = new GlideRecord(tableName);
    child.get(children.getUniqueValue());
    Tree.traversePostOrder({
      node: child,
      parentField,
      stackPath,
      callback,
    });
  }

  // execute the callback function for the current node
  if (callback && typeof callback === "function") callback(node);

  stackPath.pop();
};
```

The difference between a pre-order and post-order traversal, in terms of code
and logic, is minimal. The code that processes/visits a node - a callback
function in this case - occurs after the recursive function. That's it. It's
almost disappointingly simple. Our callback can be dropped to just below the
`while` loop, and now nodes will be processed from the bottom up, child to
parent.

## Validating the function

We can validate that the processing happening post-order as intended by using a
similar background script and user group hierarchy that we used to test the
pre-order method.

#### User groups

```
Root Group
├── Intermediate Group 1
│	└── Leaf Group 1
└── Intermediate Group 2
	└── Leaf Group 2
```

#### Background Script

```js
let root = new GlideRecord("sys_user_group");
root.get("9ef89dea2b04ba907f83fedba291bf14"); // root group
Tree.traversePostOrder({
  node: root,
  callback: (node) => gs.info(node.getDisplayValue()),
});

/** OUTPUT:
 * Leaf Group 1
 * Intermediate Group 1
 * Leaf Group 2
 * Intermediate Group 2
 * Root Group
 */
```

## How does it work?

If you are relatively new to recursion, you may be wondering how such a tiny
change can completely flip the order in which our nodes our processed. Both
traversals use the exact same logic - depth first search - so both actually
follow the exact same path when traversing nodes. The key difference is when we
**_visit_** or **_process_** each node.

Recursive function calls rely on the call stack - as each function is called, it
is pushed to the stack. When a function completes, it is removed from the stack.
The first function called will be the final one to complete, as it waits for all
the recursive calls to finish. The first function call that does not have have
additional children to process, and therefore does not invoke an additional
recursive function call, will be the first to return.

This is why such a simple change completely changes the processing order. In
pre-order traversal, the callback function processes each node as it is
traversed, and then recurses. In post-order traversal,processing happens after
recursing, so nodes are only processed when there are no additional child nodes
to recurse. Others have already covered these topics in detail, so I'd suggest
doing further research on the call stack and recursion if you are looking to
learn more about exactly what happens behind the scenes when a recursive
function call is made.

## Future clean-up and enhancements

For now, I've updated the
[Tree](https://github.com/ltcovalt/covalt-dev/blob/main/src/content/scripts/servicenow/Tree.js)
utility with the `traversePostOrder` function exactly as is was covered in this
post. If you're anything like me though, there's a good chance that you were
highly bothered by copying and pasting ~30 lines of code only to move a single
line. This is definitely a code smell, and a pretty clear indicator that we're
going to want to abstract the repeated logic into its own function. I don't mind
occasional repetition, especially if it gets you up and running faster, but I
make it a priority to never repeat myself more than once whenever possible.

Eliminating repetitive code is especially important when it comes to
maintenance. I already know that I want to enhance the DFS methods with the
ability to abort traversal and handle a list of child nodes rather than a
reference to a parent, for example. If the redundant code isn't abstracted, I
would need to make the enhancements in multiple places. This increases the
opportunity for bugs to sneak in and makes it easy for lose feature parity
across our API, so it is definitely something I will update in the near future.

As always, the complete code containing the latest updates and enhancements can
be found on my GitHub:
[Tree](https://github.com/ltcovalt/covalt-dev/blob/main/src/content/scripts/servicenow/Tree.js)
