---
title: Hello World!
slug: hello-world
description: Hello world! Welcome to covalt.dev
author: Luke Covalt
date: 2025-08-14
updated: 2025-08-16
draft: false
tags: ["astro", "blog"]
---

Welcome to covalt.dev - my third (and hopefully final) attempt at launching a
personal website where I plan to share all my technology focused ramblings.

## Wait, the third attempt?

Yes. Admittedly, the first two attempts were half-hearted and my motivation has
shifted substantially since then. I plan to write about that experience and my
motivations in more detail later. For now, the short version of that story is
that I didn't really care about launching a site - my goal was to learn a few
new technologies I hadn't worked with before. When that goal was met, I didn't
feel compelled to continue developing the site.

## Will this time be any different?

I hope so! My goals have changed and I'm motivated to share my experience with
others. My main goal this time around isn't to learn a new language or
experiment with a fancy new framework - though that is a nice bonus! It's about
launching a functional site to share my experience with others. Rather than
choosing a tech stack based on what I want to learn, I'm choosing a tech stack
makes it easy to publish and maintain content long term. While I can't promise I
will post on a consistent basis, I do expect the site to remain online and
functional this time. Probably.

## Why Now?

I've been working in the technology sector for around twenty years in a variety
of roles. I have always had a passion for continuous learning and I enjoy
sharing what I learn to help others. I decided it is time to branch out beyond
my immediate team members and share my experience with a broader community, just
like so many others that have helped me.

## What's next?

Now that I actually have my site published and stable, it's time to start making
some content! I'll probably start by going into more detail about this site's
tech stack compared to my previous sites and explain the rationale behind my
decisions. I'll also likely post about any major features I build along the way,
assuming they are interesting. Eventually, I would love to host a documentation
site for the various modules, classes, and utilities that I build. Stay tuned!
